# Dalloc, the D memory allocator.

Dalloc is a memory allocator for D. It is meant to be usable as the main memory
allocator for D and provide top of the line performance, as well as high
adaptability to typical D use cases.

in addition to allocating, freeing and reallocating memory, dalloc has features
required for D:

- It can GC allocation which have not been explicitely freed.
- It can track which allocation contain pointers or not, which helps speedup
  garbage collection.
- It can track appenable allocations, which can be appended to without
  reallocating when conditions allows.
- It can track destructible allocations, so the GC can run destructors when
  appropriate.

But most importantly, if the user choses to free its allocations, dalloc will
not impose the cost of using a GC on the user and performs on par with high end
malloc implementations.

## C/C++ interroperability

In order to provide full C and C++ interroperability, dalloc comes with an
implementation of the C API functions used to allocate memory. Allocations made
with the C API are considered to possibly contain pointers.

## Size class

Dalloc separates allocations sizes in classes. Computing size classes in an
apropriate way is capital: if there aren't enough size class, we are going to
see a lot of internal fragmentation - space within allocations which is unused -
but, on other hand, if we have too many, we will often be unable to reuse gaps
in between allocations, creating external fragmentation.

Dallok uses size classes of the form `[4, 5, 6, 7] * 2^n` which provides 2 bits
of precision. This strategy is similar to the one used by jemalloc, as it turns
out to be a good tradeof in practice.

## Extent and the Extent Map

Each memory allocation is represented by an Extent. Each extent runs over a
number of 4kb pages. Large allocations are rounded up to the closest number of
pages.

For small allocation, we use a special kind of extent called a slab. A Slab
allocates several slots at once, and contains a bitmap indicating which slots
are allocated or not.

In order to find an extent from an address, which is required to implement
`free` and for the mark phase of the garbage collection, we use the extent map.
We assume an address space of 48bits in size, and 12 of these are adressing
within a page. This leaves us with 36bits to map from an address to an extent.

To do so, we use a 2 level radix tree. The first level is an array of 2^18
pointers to the next level of the tree. It is initially filled with null
pointers, which means nothign is mapped in the address range. The second level
is an array of 2^18 page descriptors. The page descriptor contains various
informations about what's in that page, including a pointer to the related
extent if apropriate.

The extent map is lock free, so multi threaded applications can concurrent mark
algorithms can proceed at full speed.

Exemple of pointer lookup in the extent map:

```
Pointer : 0x0000403fe000
Level 0 : 0x00001
Level 1 : 0x003fe

            0       1                 3fffe   3ffff
        +-------+-------+--  ...  --+-------+-------+
        |       |       |           |       |       |
        |       |       |           |       |       |
        |       |       |           |       |       |
        +-------+---o---+--  ...  --+-------+-------+
                    |
  +-----------------+
  |
  |       0                  3fe                3ffff
  |   +-------+--  ...  --+-------+--  ...  --+-------+
  |   |       |           |       |           |       |
  +-->|       |           |       |           |       |
      |       |           |       |           |       |
      +-------+--  ...  --+-------+--  ...  --+-------+
                         /         \
      Page descriptor:  /           \
    +-------------------------------------------+
    |               :                   :       |
    | Index, Arena  :  Extent address   : Class |
    |               :                   :       |
    +-------------------------o-----------------+
                              |
  +---------------------------+
  |
  |     Extent:
  |   +-------------------------------------------+
  |   |                     :                     |
  +-->|  Extent data        :     Slab bitmap     |
      |                     :                     |
      +-------------------------------------------+
```

## Region allocator

At the root of dalloc lies the region allocator. The region alocator request and
tracks ranges of address space from the OS.

It requests region of memory from the system by chunks of 1GB, or more for
allocation larger than 1GB. The address space is never returned to the OS, but
the memory itself can be.

Two region allocators are in use: one to track region that may contain pointer,
and one for regiosn that may not. This ensure that we can easily identify the
address space used for data that cotnains pointers, and leverage the MMU to do
write barriers, for instance.

## Arenas

Dalloc comes with 4096 pre allocated arenas. Because they are all zero
initiallized, they do not take any memory in practice unless they are used. Half
of the arenas are for allocations that may contain pointer and the other half
for allocations that may not.

Arenas will request blocks (2MB) from the region allocator and allocate ranges
of 4kb pages from them. Each block used by the arena comes with a page
descriptor which has a bitmap of which pages are allocated within it or not.

The id of the CPU core on which the thread is currently running decides what
arena to use. This ensures a low level of contention in practice, and will limit
the number of arena used to twice the number of core on the machine.

### Large allocations

All the block descriptors which have any slots left are kept in the serie of
pairing heaps, based on the maximum size class that can be allocated. The
pairing heaps allows for amortized constant time insertions and deletions. This
way, finding a block to allocate from can be extremely quick.

### Small allocations

For each small size class, the arena contains a bin from which small allocations
can be done. Each bin contains a pairing heap of all the non full slab of that
size class that the arena handles. In case a bin ran out of slabs, a new slab is
allocated using the same strategy as large allocations.

## Thread Cache

**/!\ Thread cache are not fully implemented as this time!**

Each thread that allocates memory has a thread local cache. Small allocations
are typically served from the cache, and the cache is refilled in bulk from the
arena when it runs out. When freeing elements, they are not actually freed, but
instead put in the thread cache for later resue. Element are released in batch
when the cache grow too large.

This mechnism ensures that most of allocations avoid any possible contention and
are served as fast as possible. In addition, this improve the locality of
allocation on a per thread basis as they come from the same batch of
allocations, which reduce pressure ont he TLB.
